--- Page 1 ---
Week 1: Topological Spaces and Continuous Functions
Yichao Huang
Beijing Institute of Technology
1

--- Page 2 ---
Review: topology of R

--- Page 3 ---
Countable and uncountable sets
Let A, B be two sets.
We say that ∣A∣ ≤ ∣B∣ if there exists an injection f ∶ A → B.
We say ∣A∣ = ∣B∣ if there exists a bijection between A and B.
It is useful to have the following theorem of Schröder-Bernstein:
∣A∣ = ∣B∣ if and only if ∣A∣ ≤ ∣B∣ and ∣B∣ ≤ ∣A∣.
A set A is countable if ∣A∣ ≤ ∣N∣. A set A is infinite if ∣N∣ ≤ ∣A∣.
Fact: ∣R∣ = ∣P(N)∣, which is strictly bigger than ∣N∣.
2

--- Page 4 ---
Open sets and neighborhood of R
A set U ⊂ R is called open if for any x ∈ U, there is an open interval contained
in U that contains x, i.e. (x − δ, x + δ) ⊂ U with δ > 0.
Notice that ∅ and R are open. An open set is necessarily a union of open intervals,
as we can take the union of each (x − δ, x + δ) above for all x ∈ U.
A set U ⊂ R is a neighborhood of x ∈ R, if there is an open interval contained
in U that contains x.
Therefore, a set U ⊂ R is open if and only if it is a neighborhood for all x ∈ U.
Finally a set F ⊂ R is closed if and only if its complement F c is open in R.
3

--- Page 5 ---
Intersection, union and real sequences
An arbitrary union of open sets in R is open.
A finite intersection of open sets in R is open.
But ⋂n≥0(−1/n, 1/n) = {0}, which is not open.
Example: the set of rational numbers Q ⊂ R is not open, nor closed.
A sequence of real numbers xn converges to some x ∈ R if and only if for every
neighborhood Vx of x, for all suﬀiciently large n (i.e. ∃N > 0, ∀n ≥ N), xn ∈ Vx .
A set F ⊂ R is closed if and only if every limit of every convergent sequence in F
belongs to F .
4

--- Page 6 ---
Interior, isolated, boundary and accumulation points in R
Let A ⊂ R be a subset of R. Then x ∈ A is called
1. an interior point of A if there exists δ > 0 such that (x − δ, x + δ) ⊂ A;
2. an isolated point of A if there exists δ > 0 such that x is the only point of A
belonging to (x − δ, x + δ);
3. a boundary point of A if for every δ > 0, the interval (x − δ, x + δ) intersects
both A and Ac ;
4. an accumulation point of A if for every δ > 0, the interval (x − δ, x + δ) contains
some other point of A other than x.
Important: rephrase these definitions in terms of neighborhoods.
5

--- Page 7 ---
Connectedness and compactness R
A set of real numbers is connected if and only if it is an interval.
Therefore, a connected set in R is the same as path connected, or convex.
However the true definition (with only open sets) is that a connected set A cannot
be written as the disjoint sum of two non-empty open sets in A.
A set of real numbers is compact if and only if it is closed and bounded
(Heine-Borel). Or if and only if every sequence has a convergent subsequence
(Bolzano-Weierstrass).
However the true definition (with only open sets) is that a set is compact if and
only if every open cover has a finite subcover.
6

--- Page 8 ---
Example: a new definition of
continuity

--- Page 9 ---
Preimage of a function
Consider a map between sets f ∶ E → F . For any subset Y ⊂ F , the preimage of Y
by the map f is defined as
f −1(Y ) = {x ∈ E ; f (x) ∈ Y }.
It is a subset of E and this is well-defined for any map.
Notice that for the direct image f (⋃ Ai ) = ⋃ f (Ai ), f (⋂ Ai ) ⊂ ⋂ f (Ai ), but for the
preimage, f −1(⋃ Bi ) = ⋃ f −1(Bi ), f −1(⋂ Bi )= ⋂ f −1(Bi ).
7

--- Page 10 ---
The ϵ − δ definition of the continuity revisited
Recall the ϵ − δ definition for a function f ∶ R → R. The continuity of the function f
at a point a with y = f (a) is defined as
∀ϵ > 0, ∃δ > 0, ∀∣x − a∣ < δ, ∣f (x) − f (a)∣ < ϵ.
Let us rewrite this in terms of preimage:
∀ϵ > 0, ∃δ > 0, (a − δ, a + δ) ⊂ f −1((f (a) − ϵ, f (a) + ϵ)).
That is, the preimage of any neighborhood of y = f (a) is a neighborhood of a.
In fact, the continuity above is equivalent to the very general statement:
The preimage of any open set by f is an open set.
We only need to know about open sets to define continuity.
8

--- Page 11 ---
Theory: topological spaces and
continuous functions

--- Page 12 ---
Topological spaces
A topological space is a set X equipped with a collection O of open sets O ⊂ X.
That is, a set O ⊂ X is called open if and only if O ∈ O. We require that:
1. Trivial sets are open: ∅, X ∈ O;
2. Closure under finite intersection : if U, V ∈ O then U ∩ V ∈ O;
3. Closure under arbitrary union : if A ⊂ O then ⋃O∈A O ∈ O.
Informally speaking, finite intersection of open sets is open and any union of open
sets is open.
9

--- Page 13 ---
Open and closed sets
A topology on X is simply the declaration of open sets (X, O).
A set F is called closed (“fermé” in French) if its complement is open, i.e. if X − F
is open or X − F ∈ O. You should check that
1. Trivial sets are closed;
2. Closure under finite union ;
3. Closure under arbitrary intersection .
Equivalently, you can specify a topology by giving all the closed sets, but the
convention is to use open sets.
10

--- Page 14 ---
Example: two basic topologies
Given a set X, there are always two possible topologies:
1. Trivial topology: the topology where only ∅ and X are open;
2. Discrete topology : the topology where every subset of X is open.
Two topologies are the same if all the open sets are the same, O = O′.
A topology O′ is finer than O if O ⊂ O′. We also say that O is coarser than O′.
Two topologies might not be necessarily comparable.
Then the finest topology is the discrete topology, and the least fine (=smallest)
topology is the trivial topology (also called indiscrete topology ).
We often omit O and write only X instead of (X, O) for a topological space.
11

--- Page 15 ---
Basis of a topology
For R, it is rather hard to define a generic open set. Instead, we implicitly used the
following definition (you should verify that this defines indeed a topology):
A basis B of a topology is a collection of sets such that
1. X = ⋃B∈B B;
2. If x ∈ X, B1, B2 ∈ B such that x ∈ B1 and x ∈ B2, then there exists
B3 ∈ B such that x ∈ B3 ⊂ B1 ∩ B2.
Then we say that a set O is open if it is a union of elements in B (called
generated by B, i.e. for all x ∈ O, there is some B ∈ B such that x ∈ B ⊂ O).
For example, a basis for the usual topology on Rn is given by the collection of open
balls B(x , ϵ) for x ∈ Rn and ϵ > 0.
In general, the topology O generated by a list of properties is the smallest topology
for which these properties hold.
12

--- Page 16 ---
Basis criterion
Equivalently, a family B of subsets of X is a basis for the topology O iff
1. Every element in B is in O;
2. For every open set O in O and point x ∈ O, there is some basic open set
B ∈ B such that x ∈ B ⊂ O.
Proof.
/Leftrightline ⇒ Every element in B can be written as a union with one element (itself): thus
the first point. For the second point, if x ∈ O and O is union of elements in B, then
x ∈ B for some B ∈ B.
⇐ /Leftrightline Take O ∈ O, x ∈ O and denote by Bx ∈ B such that x ∈ Bx ⊂ O by the second
point. Then O is the union of all such Bx , and this also applies to the open set
O = X. Now take B1, B2 ∈ B ⊂ O: then B1 ∩ B2 is open and the second point yields
some B3 ∈ B such that x ∈ B3 ⊂ B1 ∩ B2.
13

--- Page 17 ---
Continuous functions
We have the following generalized definition of continuity:
A function f ∶ X → Y between two topological spaces is called continuous if
f −1(U) is open in X for any open set U ⊂ Y .
That is, the preimage by a continuous function of an open set is an open set.
Intuitively, this says “ f (x) is close to f (a) whenever x is close to a” .
1. Composition of continuous functions is continuous.
2. It suﬀices to verify the preimage condition on a basis B of Y .
For example, to check that f ∶ X → R is continuous, it suﬀices to show that
f −1(a, b) is open for all (a, b) ∈ R.
14

--- Page 18 ---
Homeomorphism
Homeomorphic spaces are topologically the same.
A bijection between spaces, f ∶ X → Y is a homeomorphism if and only if f
and f −1 are continuous.
In other words, O is open if and only if f (O) is open.
A bijective continuous map is not always a homeomorphism. Example:
f ∶ N → {0} ∪ {1/1, 1/2, 1/3, . . .}, f (0) = 0, f (n) = 1/n, n ≥ 1.
However, bijective continuous map between compact Hausdorff spaces (defined
later in this course) is always a homeomorphism.
15

--- Page 19 ---
Example: R and (0, 1)
The overall size of a space is not something topologically invariant.
The real numbers R and homeomorphic to the open interval (0, 1).
Hint: consider tan ∶ (−π/2, π/2) → R.
One of the main goals of topology is to classify topological invariants, e.g. objects
that are stable under homeomorphisms.
16

--- Page 20 ---
Closure, interior and boundary
We can already define a lot of notions with only open and closed sets.
1. Closure. The closure A of A ⊂ X is the smallest closed set containing A.
2. Interior. The interior ˚A of A ⊂ X is the largest open set contained in A.
3. Boundary. The boundary ∂A of A ⊂ X is the difference A − ˚A.
4. Density. We say A ⊂ X is dense if and only if A = X.
A point x ∈ X lies on the boundary if and only if every neighborhood of x
intersects both A and X − A. For example, the boundary of Q in R is R.
A topological space with a countable dense subset is called separable.
17

--- Page 21 ---
Limit points and isolated points
We should generally replace the idea of convergence sequences by neighborhoods,
since in general there is no metric to measure the distance to the (possible) limit.
We say that x is the limit of a sequence {xn}n≥0 if every neighborhood of x
meets all but a finite subset of {xn}n≥0.
We say that x is a limit point of A if every neighborhood of x meets A − {x}.
Verify that in a metric space, this means that x is limit point if and only if there
exists a sequence an ∈ A such that an → x.
Exercise: the closure A of A is the union of A and its limit points.
A point x ∈ A is isolated if it has a neighborhood V such that V ∩ A = {x}.
Exercise: every point of a closed set A is either a limit point or an isolated point.
18

--- Page 22 ---
Example: derived sets
The set of limit points A′ of a closed set A ⊂ R is called the derived set of A, i.e. we
throw away the isolated points.
The Cantor set K does not contain any interval yet K′ = K. However, a countable
closed set A ∈ [0, 1] always contain an isolated point (by Baire), so that A′ ≠ A.
On the other hand, a countable closed set A ⊂ [0, 1] always has an isolated point,
so that A′ ≠ A (this we shall not prove). This led Cantor to the invention of
ordinals and much of the set theory, but we will not discuss this in this course.
19

--- Page 23 ---
Example: sequences are not enough
Let X = R equipped with the topology T that closed sets are R and countable sets
of R. Take the ball B = B(0, 1) ⊂ X.
Then the closure of B is the smallest closed sets containing B, so B = R.
But there is no sequence in B that converges to 2 ∈ B, since every sequence in B is
already closed!
Therefore, pay attention to the definition of limit points ! We will see later that the
sequential definition is very different from the neighborhood formalism.
20

--- Page 24 ---
Hausdorff spaces
We say X is Hausdorff if any pair of distinct points have disjoint neighborhoods.
It is important to notice that the limit of a sequence (if there is one) in a Hausdorff
space is unique. This is not true e.g. for the trivial topology.
This is usually called the T 2 axiom. It implies the T 1 axiom that points are closed.
For example, if X is infinite with the cofinite topology, then X is T 1, but not T 2.
The product of Hausdorff spaces is Hausdorff.
The subspace of a Hausdorff space is Hausdorff.
You should try to prove the above propositions.
21

--- Page 25 ---
Functions and topology
Let C(X, Y ) be the set of all continuous functions f ∶ X → Y . We write
C(X) = C(X, R) for the set of continuous real-valued functions. Then C(X) is an
algebra, i.e. it is closed under the sum f + g and the product f g, and contains 1.
In fact, if we take Y = {0, 1} with a suitable topology, then the space C(X, Y )
uniquely determines the topology on X:
Consider Y with the topology that {1} is open and {0} is not. Then A ⊂ X
is open if and only if 111A is continuous.
22

--- Page 26 ---
Neighborhood and limit
A neighborhood of x ∈ X is just an open set V ⊂ X such that x ∈ V . Sometimes the
set of neighborhood of x is denoted V(x).
We say that a sequence xn converges to x if for any neighborhood V of x, xn ∈ V for
all large enough n, i.e. ∀V ∈ V(x), ∃N ∈ N, ∀n ≥ N, xn ∈ V .
Consider the cofinite topology : A ⊂ X is closed if and only if ∣A∣ < ∞ or A = X.
If xn is a sequence in X, then xn → x for any x ∈ X! There is no uniqueness of limit
in this topology.
23

--- Page 27 ---
Example: the lower-limit topology
Consider the topology Rl on R generated by the intervals [a, b), i.e. the latter form
a basis of open sets. In this topology, xn → x if and only if xn converges to x in the
usual sense and xn ≥ x for all large enough n.
A function f ∶ Rl → R is continuous if and only if f (xn) → f (x) whenever xn → x
from above. The identity map i ∶ Rl → R is continuous, but i ∶ R → Rl is not.
The Rl is also called the lower-limit or uphill topology . It is easier to “go down
from above” than to “climb up from below” . This lack of symmetry is not
consistent with a metric: if fact Rl is not metrizable.
24

--- Page 28 ---
Example: the product topology
Let X and Y be topological spaces.
The product topology on X × Y is generated by sets of the form U × V with
U open in X and V open in Y .
Notice that there are more open sets in X × Y than just those written as U × V .
1. The product topology is the smallest topology such that the projections
X × Y → X, X × Y → Y are continuous.
2. A function f ∶ Z → X × Y such that f (z) = (f1(z), f2(z)) is continuous if and
only if each of its coordinates f1 and f2 is continuous.
Example: with the usual I = [0, 1] ⊂ R, the product topology on I2 is the usual one.
25

--- Page 29 ---
Example: topology on the square
A set X with a total ordering can be made topological Xo by taking the intervals
(a, b) = {x ∈ X ; a < x < b} as a basis.
The lexicographical ordered square I2
o has a weirder topology. If (a, b) ∈ I2
o with
0 < b < 1, then for any b ∈ (b′, b′′) ⊂ (0, 1), the vertical segment {a} × (b′, b′′) is
open in I2
o . So an open subset in the interior of I2 in the usual sense is open for I2
o .
Things are harder on the boundary: consider a neighborhood of (a, 1) in I2
o . If
0 < a < 1, then it must contain some {a′} × S, where S is a vertical segment. So a
small neighborhood of (a, 1) in I2
o is not open in the usual sense.
Indeed, in a dictionary, if w = Czech is the last word in the section C, then any
neighborhood of w contains some word beginning with D.
26

--- Page 30 ---
Example: the subspace topology
If A ⊂ X and X is a topological space, the subspace topology on A is defined by
OA = {U ∩ A ; U ∈ OX}.
This is the unique topology such that f ∶ Z → A is continuous if and only if ι ○ f is
continuous, where ι ∶ A → X is the inclusion map .
We will see later that this is the topology induced by the inclusion ι ∶ A → X, i.e.
the coarsest topology on A making ι continuous.
1. What is the subspace topology of [0, 1] ⊂ R?
2. What is the subspace topology of R ∪ i R ⊂ C?
3. What is the subspace topology of the square I2 as a subspace of the ordered
plane R2
o? Answer: it is not the ordered square I2
o .
27
